JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 5 ISSUES 1 – 2

PEER-REVIEWED

Simon Krogh
Copenhagen Business School
Cloud Computing
A Social Relations Perspective

ABSTRACT
The second half of the 20th century has been characterized by an explosive
development in information technology (Maney, Hamm, & O'Brien, 2011). Processing
power, storage capacity and network bandwidth have increased exponentially, resulting
in new possibilities and shifting IT paradigms. In step with technological changes, the
paradigmatic pendulum has swung between increased centralization on one side and a
focus on distributed computing that pushes IT power out to end users on the other.
With the introduction of outsourcing and cloud computing, centralization in large
data centers is again dominating the IT scene. 
In line with the views presented by Nicolas Carr in 2003 (Carr, 2003), it is a popular
assumption that cloud computing will be the next utility (like water, electricity and
gas) (Buyya, Yeo, Venugopal, Broberg, & Brandic, 2009). However, this assumption
disregards the fact that most IT production environments, unlike water and power
supply, are in a constant state of change driven by new demands from users and the
desire to utilize advances in technology. Research in IT outsourcing (ITO) has
documented that social relations play a key role in successful ITO (M. C. Lacity, Khan,
& Willcocks, 2009), for instance, in establishing and maintaining trust between the
involved parties (Sabherwal, 1999). So far, research in cloud computing has neglected
this perspective and focused entirely on aspects relating to technology, economy,
security and legal questions.
While the core technologies of cloud computing (e.g. virtualization and workload
balancing) are tried and tested, the consequences for IT professionals in the affected IT
departments have not been studied in detail. Similar to Marston et al. (Marston, Li,
Bandyopadhyay, Zhang, & Ghalsasi, 2011), this paper points to the need for studying
the social, relational and inter-organizational challenges associated with the widespread
introduction of cloud computing. 

21

