JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 3 ISSUE 1

PEER-REVIEWED PAPER
Jan Eckert
IUAV University of Venice

SnowSense
A Case Study of User-centered Location-based Services

ABSTRACT
SnowSense is one of the projects at the core of the research in Information  
Design at the IUAV University of Venice, especially dealing with the development  
of Location Based Services (LBS). This article reports on a case study conducted  
in cooperation with the WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF1 in 
Davos, Switzerland. The project sets out to open up new ways for preventing  
avalanche-related accidents by applying a user-centered design approach and  
new technologies. The embracing research framework addresses the evolution of  
LBS and how their adoption changes the way people interact with the places they  
live, work or act in.
INTRODUCTION
The   fact   that   today   most   information   about   a   specific   location   is   almost 
immediately available changes the way people approach certain locations or 
plan relocation, such as when traveling to a foreign country. On the one hand, 
this may decrease the quantity of information we think we have to seek out 
before   moving   to   that   new   place;   on   the   other   hand   it   opens   up   vast 
opportunities to access information at the right time or even generate new 
information   that   can   be   shared   with   others.   To   information   designers,   the 
scenario   is   an   invitation   to   investigate   how   this   information   should   be 
structured first and distributed successfully second, to the end-users.

Since many of the issues related to the subject rise from social behavior, a 
decision was taken early in the project to look for applications that impacted 
socially   relevant  areas.   The   objective   was   to   study  the   different   dynamics 
between information, people, their activities, and their location. The purpose 
was   not   to   create   just   another   location-based   service   (LBS),   but   to 
demonstrate   that   design   applied   to   relevant   activities   may   become   more 
relevant to other people as well. 

Following up on Jorge Frascara's call to become “problem identifiers instead of 
problem solvers” (Frascara 2006), a specific area and problem was identified 
that could be addressed through a design process even if at a first glance it 
did   not   seem   to   present   such   a   relevant   design   issue.   It   happened 
nonetheless to be very close to personal interests, and socially relevant in the 
local   context   of   the   Alps   mountain   region.   Every   year   a   high   number   of 

1 The WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF is part of the Swiss Federal Institute for 

Forest, Snow and Landscape Research WSL and is based in Davos, Switzerland.

JOURNALOFIA.ORG | ISSN 1903-7260

5

