JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 4 ISSUES 1 – 2

PEER-REVIEWED
Guglielmo Pescatore
University of Bologna
Veronica Innocenti
University of Bologna

Information Architecture in Contemporary 
Television Series
Translated by S. and M. Francoli, Ricomunica (ricomunica.it). Revised by the authors.
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to apply some of the principles of IA to a disciplinary 
sector that is adjacent but has not traditionally considered this kind of approach. 
Basically, what we suggest in the paper, is the need to adopt a wider vision of IA, 
considering it as the design of every shared information environment. Therefore, in our 
paper, we propose to apply IA principles to the media field, also trying a synthesis with 
principles and topics that come from other study fields (such as semiotics, media studies 
etc.)   and   that   are   traditionally   associated   to   TV   series,   demonstrating   relevant 
intersections point.
Thus, our ultimate purpose is offering a cross-disciplinary approach capable of taking 
advantage from all those fields together. In order to do so, we will focus our paper on 
some   relevant   changes   that   affected   the   TV   series   production   in   recent   years, 
suggesting that we cannot consider a TV series as just “a text” anymore, but instead we 
need to study and analyze TV series as narrative ecosystems, that is to say as a 
composite   environment,   able   to   integrate   the   energy   flows   originated   by   users, 
technologies and media items
Recently, especially American TV series have enjoyed great success and have stimulated 
considerable critical attention from scholars of audiovisual media – recently in Italy, 
Franco La Polla, Aldo Grasso, Massimo Scaglioni Franco Monteleone, as well as in 
Anglo-Saxon circles Jason Mittell, Roberta Pearson, Christy Dena and Henry Jenkins – 
who have stressed the important experimental work on narrative structures and staging, 
the complex mechanisms of production and promotion, along with the significance of 
the response these products generate in their viewers.

57

