JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 3 ISSUE 1

INVITED PAPER
Jorge Arango
BootStudio

Architectures

(Young Egyptians), gazing through the windows of the Internet, have  
gained a keener sense than many of their elders of the freedoms and  
opportunities they lack. They have found in social media a way to  
interact and share ideas, bypassing, in virtual space, the restrictions  
placed on physical freedom of assembly.

– Mohamed ElBaradei, New York Times, February 10, 2011

We live in strange times. Governments are being brought down by people 
congregating   in   “virtual   space”,   while   century-old   media   empires   are 
crumbling as their traditional business is decimated by “digital editions”. We 
meet with friends in Facebook, as opposed to face-to-face, and “log in” to our 
bank in order to pay our bills. In short, it’s become clear that digital space is  
taking over from physical space as the container for ever more of our day-to-
day interactions with our institutions and with other people1.

We implicitly perceive these digital containers of experience as spaces, as Mr. 
ElBaradei   explains   in   the   quote   above.   Our   language   strains   with   clumsy 
architectural metaphors such as “gazing through the windows of the Internet” 
in order to describe the ways we inhabit and use them.

Who designs these spaces? And – more importantly – are they aware that 
they are designing space when they do so? I argue that the answer to the first 
question should be “information architects”, and the answer to the second 
should be “they should”.

Human beings have been designing spaces to host our interactions – to stage 
our experiences – for thousands of years2. In traditional architecture, we have 
a  rich   field   that  can   serve   as   a  springboard   to   for  the   design   of   effective 
information  environments.  However, much  of  the  discussion  in  the  field of 
information   architecture   has   focused   on   linguistic   approaches   to   the 
structuring   of   information   environments.   The   designers   of   many   of   these 
“virtual spaces” have thus far approached these design challenges as literary 
exercises on one extreme, and as visual design exercises on the other.

1 Coward & Salingaros 2004.

2 Bachelard 1969.

JOURNALOFIA.ORG | ISSN 1903-7260

41

