JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 5 ISSUES 1 – 2

PEER-REVIEWED

Katalin Fehér
Budapest Business School
Consumption of Metapatterns
A CDT Model for the Understanding of Patterns in New Media

ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on digitally mediatizated patterns and on the impact their
representations might make on users. Hypothesis: new media merge communication-
technology with users’ networking and social conduct and, consequently, they
constitute metapatterns framing society and social networks. Platforms and contents
are vehicles for messages and data for the purpose of identification via interfaces; and
platforms with uploaded/formed universal or personal contents might as well generate
user-experience. Consequently, we need to find the main directions among new media
phenomena in order to interpret digital mediatization and its impact on contents and
user experience. This paper illustrates the new media metapatterns of convergence,
divergence and transvergence and frames them through a CDT model that can be used
to map both the dynamics and the consumption patterns of new media development.
INTRODUCTION
New media devices/tools, platforms and interfaces rewire social-cultural and network-
communication. The result is or is not a user experience. This paper focuses on the
digitally mediatized patterns and their representations with some impact on users. Our
goal is to depict the main trends in patterns of communication, that is, to explore the
mainstream operations/activities of digital mediatization. This paper target the study of
constituents and patterns of new media. The main question is what attributes of new
media reflect patterns of social communication? What synergies depict digital media?
How can user experience account for it? According to my hypothesis new media
merge communication-technology with users’ networking and social conduct, and,
constitute metapatterns over society and social networks. Media supersize the social
into the hype(rsocial). A model that incorporates the mainstream dynamic of new
media gives us a chance to study patterns of digital mediatization and it will interpret
complex user experience phenomena via compact patterns.

9

