JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 3 ISSUE 2

REPRINT
Andrea Resmini
University of Borås
Luca Rosati
Information architect

A Brief History of Information Architecture
This article is a reprint of parts of Chapter 2, “Towards a Pervasive Information Architecture”, from 
Andrea Resmini and Luca Rosati's “Pervasive Information Architecture”, a book published by Morgan 
Kauffman. The text was partially edited for clarity by the authors. The Journal would like to thank 
Morgan Kauffman for consenting to the reprint. All rights remain the property of the original right 
holders.

The metaphors we use constantly in our everyday language profoundly influence what we 
do because they shape our understanding. They help us describe and explore new ideas in 
terms and concepts found in more familiar domains. 
Earl Morrogh, Information Architecture: An Emerging 21st Century Profession, 2003

Information architecture (IA) is a professional practice and field of studies focused on 
solving the basic problems of accessing, and using, the vast amounts of information 
available today. You commonly hear of information architecture in connection with 
the  design  of   web   sites  both   large   and  small,   and  when  wireframes,   labels,   and 
taxonomies are discussed. As it is today, it is mainly a production activity, a craft, and it 
relies on an inductive process and a set, or many sets, of guidelines, best practices, and 
personal and professional expertise. In other words, information architecture is arguably 
not a science but, very much like say industrial design, an applied art.
Even though its modern use, strictly related to the design of information, goes back no 
farther   than   the   mid-1970s   and   Richard   Saul   Wurman’s   famous   address   at   the 
American Institute of Architecture conference of 1976, use of the term information 
together with the term architecture1, has been around for a little bit longer and in quite 

1

It must be remembered that Wurman wrote an article with Joel Katz entitled “Beyond Graphics: The Architecture of 
Information,” which was published by the AIA Journal in 1975. In an interview with Dirk Knemeyer in 2004, Wurman 
said: “The common term then was ‘information design.’ What got confusing was information design and interior design and 
industrial design, at that moment and still today in many and most people’s minds, are about making something look good. 

33

