JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 2 ISSUE 2

PEER-REVIEWED PAPER
Elise Conradi

to_be_classified
A Facet Analysis of a Folksonomy

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the use of the postulational approach to facet analysis to  
manually induce a faceted classification ontology from a folksonomy. An in-depth 
study of faceted classification theory is used to form a methodology based on the  
postulational approach, which is then used to facet analyze a dataset consisting  
of over 107,000 instances of 1,275 unique tags representing 76 popular non-
fiction history books collected from the LibraryThing folksonomy. Preliminary  
results of the facet analysis indicate the manual inducement of two faceted  
classification ontologies in the dataset: a completed ontology representing the  
domain of books and an incomplete ontology representing the domain of subjects  
within the domain of books. The grouping of tags into theoretically based facets  
and conceptual categories give new insight into how users describe information  
resources. Furthermore, the relationships discerned in the ontologies are user-
generated relationships between tagged information items, representing a new  
form of knowledge. Practical implications of the results are discussed in terms of  
potential areas in which user-generated metadata can enhance faceted  
structures in information architecture. 
FOLKSONOMIES: UNSTRUCTURED “WISDOM OF THE CROWD” 
Since their inception on the web in 2003 with the tagging system Del.icio.us 1, 
folksonomies   have   become   a   popular   way   to   categorize   large   amounts   of 
information resources. Folksonomies emerge from the aggregation of textual 
labels   called   tags   that   are   affixed   to   digital   objects   of   various   formats   by 
either   the   creator   or   the   users   of   the   objects   within   sites   that   allow   for 
tagging.  Vander  Wal (2005)  distinguishes  between  broad  folksonomies  and 
narrow folksonomies, explaining that a “broad folksonomy has many people 
tagging   the   same   object”   whereas   in   a   narrow   folksonomy,   an   object   is 
tagged “by one or a few people.” 

Quintarelli (2005) discusses broad folksonomies in terms of the Power Law 
distribution, stating that the “power law reveals that many people agree on 
using a few popular tags but also that smaller groups often prefer less known 
terms to describe their items of interest.” Halpin et al. (2007) argue that the 
short   head   of   the   long   tail   in   the   Power   Law   distribution   represents   a 
consensus of what users find to be most important about each information 
resource. The study of folksonomies can therefore provide invaluable insight 

1 http://del.icio.us

JOURNALOFIA.ORG | ISSN 1903-7260

5

