JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 2 ISSUE 2

PEER-REVIEWED PAPER
Laura Downey
Transportation Security Administration (TSA)

Sumit Banerjee
IBM

Building an Information 
Architecture Checklist
Encouraging and Enabling IA from Infrastructure to the 
User Interface Architecture

ABSTRACT
Government environments often have prescribed complex processes for  
obtaining and implementing technology solutions. In order to encourage and  
enable information architecture (IA) in government systems, it is essential to  
embed IA within the current processes and to view IA as part of the overall  
architectural framework. The definition of IA used here is broad and inclusive  
spanning applications, the Web and the enterprise. A common focus exists aimed  
at organizing information for findability, manageability and usefulness, but the  
definition also includes infrastructure to support organization of information. This  
case study describes the development of an IA checklist in a large United States  
government agency. The checklist is part of an architectural review process that  
is applied 1) during assessment of proposed information systems projects and 2)  
design of solution recommendations before system implementation.

INTRODUCTION: DEFINING IA
Defining IA is an exercise many researchers and practitioners have performed 
(Zachman, 1987; Wurman, 1996; Rosenfeld, 2002; Bailey 2002, Dillon 2002, 
Toms, 2002; Evernden & Evernden, 2003; Dillon & Turnbull, 2005; Morville & 
Rosenfeld, 2006; Stiglich, 2007; Hinton, 2009). Rosenfeld (2002) noted that a 
widely accepted definition of IA does not exist. Dillon & Turnbull (2005) report 
that no formal definition of IA has been agreed upon. That still appears true 
today. 

Several definitions in the IA field generally focus on organizing information via 
mechanisms such as labeling, structuring, chunking, and categorizing in order 
to support navigation, findability and usefulness. Bailey’s (2002) definition of 
IA is perhaps the simplest and most straightforward:

IA   is   the   art   and   science   of   organizing   information   so   that   it   is  
findable, manageable and useful.

JOURNALOFIA.ORG | ISSN 1903-7260

25

