JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 2 ISSUE 2

PEER-REVIEWED PAPER
Martin Frické
University of Arizona

Classification, Facets, and 
Metaproperties

ABSTRACT
The paper argues that second order properties or metaproperties are essential  
for classification and navigation of information, for example for faceted  
classification and the navigation it generates. The paper observes that  
metaproperties, are not accommodated well within such standard schemes as  
Z39.19, description logics (DLs), and the formal ontologies OWL, BFO, and  
DOLCE.
INTRODUCTION
Information needs to be classified for the purposes of searching, browsing, 
and berrypicking (Bates, 1989). Considerable progress can be made with this 
by using just the notions of particular (or item or instance or token), property 
(or universal or concept or type), and the relations ‘is a subtype of’, ‘is an 
instance   of’,   and   ‘is   a   part   of’.   This   paper   centers   on   the   relation   ‘is   an 
instance   of’.   Existing   approaches   make   extensive   use   of   this   relation.   But 
typically they do so only for the case where it is particulars or items or tokens 
that   are   instances   of   the  types.   This   amounts   to   applying  a   property   (the 
type) to an item. As such, this is a case of  first order instantiation  or the 
application   of  first   order   properties.   But   this   is   not   the   only   kind   of 
instantiation   there   is.   First   order   types   themselves   can   have   properties 
applied to them; when they do, these are cases of second order instantiation 
or the application of second order properties for example, the property ‘being 
a tiger’ itself has the property of ‘being a species’, so tiger is an instance of 
the second order type species (notice the syntax here, ‘tiger is an instance of 
species’ not ‘a tiger is an instance of species’). (There can be yet higher order 
properties, but they are not of immediate interest in this paper.) 

Sometimes   the   word   ‘metaproperties’   is   used   to   signify   second-order 
properties. On those relatively rare occasions when information scientists and 
web-site designers want to discuss properties of, or about, properties, they 
will   sometimes   call   these   ‘metaproperties’.   (Typically   philosophers   and 
logicians  would  not  talk  in  this  way,  although  they  would   have  no trouble 
understanding what was being said when others did so.) 

JOURNALOFIA.ORG | ISSN 1903-7260

43

