JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 3 ISSUE 2

REPRINT
My
Harper & Row

Lifeboat #5: Richard Saul Wurman

The following article reprints a conversation with Richard Saul Wurman originally 
published in the 1976 book “What Do We Use for Lifeboats When the Ship Goes 
Down?” The author concealed his identity under the pseudonym “My”, and the book has 
been long out of print. Nonetheless, the two-day long interview with Wurman provides a 
fascinating and intimate portrait of the information architecture pioneer on the eve his 
decision to “leave architecture.” Now-familiar turns of phrase from Wurman’s seminal 
1988-89 works “Information Anxiety” and “Hats” spill out fully formed in the panoramic 
sweep of this important conversation. Republished here under the provisions of fair use for 
research and educational purposes. All rights to the text remain exclusive property of the 
original right holders.

Rick Wurman and I have been friends a long time. It’s been growing on us; we care about  
many of the same things. I’ve wanted to interview him for a long time, and now I have a good  
reason, though he keeps telling me that he’s in communications and I keep telling him that  
he’s in space. Of course we are both talking about the same thing. Technically, Richard Saul is 
an architect, a partner in the Philadelphia firm of Murphy, Levy, Wurman. But actually, he’s  
an architect, a city planner, a human designer, a writer, a communicator, an educator, and a 
whole lot of other things that it would be tough to put a label on. He was once a protege of  
Lou Kahn. Now I guess he’s his own protege. 

Nine in the evening. Sunday. Richard Saul has spent the weekend at home with the  
family on a small farm about twenty–five miles from Philadelphia. We are meeting at his  
apartment in town, where he generally spends the rest of the week alone. When he’s not off  
lecturing or conferring somewhere else in the world, a great deal of his work is done in and  
frequently for the city of Philadelphia. He works hard, long hours. He gets a lot done.

The apartment is in an old warehouse district near the Delaware River, several blocks  
from the elegantly reconstructed Society Hill section, down but not out. I ring the bell, no  
name under it, and the door buzzes open. Standing at the top of two steep flights with a grin 
distorts the perspective and makes his short rotundness rotunder. Dungarees, a work shirt, and  
hiking boots. His uniform. Twinkling blue eyes, a full head of hair but not long, a neatly 
trimmed beard, two streaks of white at the chin. The apartment is one long narrow room,  
maybe forty by ten, lined on one side with windows that look out on another building but  

9

