JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 4 ISSUES 1 – 2

PEER-REVIEWED

Fredrik Ohlin
Malmö University

The Role of Information Architecture in 
Context-Aware Adaptive Systems

ABSTRACT
Information architecture, concerned with the structural design of information spaces/systems,  
and context-aware adaptive systems, supporting situated system use through a computational  
approach, are presented as two converging fields. Specific points of convergence include  
balancing immediate use with awareness, tackling choice overload and promoting discovery, 
and   dealing   with   the   increasing   complexity   of   user   context.   The   role   of   information  
architecture can be to apply a holistic view of systems, users, and context, thereby promoting  
awareness   and   discovery   over   of   specific   task   efficiency   measures.   Further,   designing  
meaningful structures from large, complex sets of information, is an information architecture  
skill well-suited for addressing the issues of context.
INTRODUCTION
Several research fields are concerned with creating software that somehow is beneficial 
for people to use. Recognizing that user needs and capabilities vary by situation, 
research into context-aware adaptive systems tries to better supports these variations. 
However, much emphasis is put on the effectiveness and efficiency of specific tasks, and 
not as much on longer-term support for awareness and discovery. Furthermore, the 
complexity of user context is increasing to include not only physical context, but a 
pervasive digital, social context as well. 
These factors combine to introduce and emphasize certain software design challenges. 
This paper presents three of these challenges as points of convergence between the fields 
of context-aware adaptive systems, and information architecture. After a presentation of 
the   design   challenges,   an   overview   of   the   computational   approaches   within 
context-aware   adaptive   systems   is   given,   followed   by   a   discussion   of   the   role   of 
information architecture. 

29

