JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 3 ISSUE 2

VOICES FROM THE FIELD
Raffaele Boiano1
Fondazione Enasarco
Ethnotelling for User-generated Experiences

ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on storytelling as a research tool for social sciences, especially for cultural 
anthropology. After a short review of the main methodological tools traditionally used in  
ethnography, with particular regard to observation and interview, we focus on collecting and  
crafting stories (ethnotelling) as suitable tools for conveying the relational nature of fieldwork.  
Drawing on the works of Orr, Chipchase, Marradi and Adwan/Bar-on, we show how stories  
– collected, mediated or made up – are valuable tools for representing experiences and  
identities. As a result, we suggest a different approach to user-experience design, based on the 
creation of ‘thick’ environments enabling a whole range of possibilities, where users can  
imagine or live their own user-generated experiences.

INTRODUCTION: SHIFTS 
The structural design of information spaces, in particular on the web, is an activity that 
often challenges supposedly immutable notions, such as communication, relationship, 
business, consumption. Innovations follow one another in rapid succession thanks to 
killer RIAs (Rich Internet Applications), which makes the Web an ever-changing 
productive and social environment. 
If we look at the most common job titles for web professionals from a diachronic 
perspective, we can identify a common thread among them, a trend that binds them 
together: a shift from technology design to information design, with user experience 
(“people”) as the ultimate object of interest. What does it mean “to design meanings and 
experiences in information-thick worlds”, and how can we approach this task? Cultural 
anthropology, as a holistic approach to the study of humans, and ethnography, as its 
main heuristic tool based on a direct research experience in the field, can be regarded as 
the best tools for providing some answers, or at least some clues, to these issues. 

1 The author is grateful to Laura Giacalone for her precious comments and help in translating an early draft of the article.

47

