JOURNAL OF INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE | VOLUME 3 ISSUE 1

PEER-REVIEWED PAPER
Sally Burford
University of Canberra

Web Information Architecture
A Very Inclusive Practice

ABSTRACT
Web information design, or information architecture (IA), is a critical aspect of the  
organizational use of the Web to deliver information and to communicate with  
clients. It is a relatively new instance of information organization and, although it  
draws from traditional practices such as library and information science, Web  
information architecture has its own characteristics and unique contexts. The  
practice of Web information architecture must forge its own identity. This  
research paper contributes to a greater understanding of Web information  
architecture as a practice that requires myriad conversations, negotiations and  
collaborations as it is carried out in large organizations. It is also a practice that is  
undertaken by multiple and diverse people who all make a contribution to the  
information structures of the enterprise website.
INTRODUCTION
This paper reports research that is situated in a maturing era of organizational 
use   of   the   Internet   to   inform   and   communicate.   At   the   forefront   of   an 
organization’s use of the Internet is its official website, which represents a 
digital information channel of increasing significance and audience demand. 
The   corporate   website   presents   the   opportunity   for   rapid   publishing   of 
extensive   amounts   of   information   to   a   global   audience.   From   humble 
beginnings,   the   world   wide   Web   has   emerged   to   become   a   major 
communicating and informing medium that every organization is compelled 
to attend to as part of its public communication. Information structures are a 
front on which “the struggle for commercial supremacy through information is 
being fought” (Evernden & Evernden, 2003, p. 95). 

Web IA is a term that is used to describe both the information design process 
and the outcome of that process (Morville & Rosenfeld, 2006). Intrinsic to the 
nature of hypertext, a website will have an information structure regardless of 
whether an organization consciously implements a process for Web IA and 
structures   their   Web   information   with   awareness   and   expertise.   Thus,   the 
information structures of a website may present either an optimal information 
space or a frustrating and unsuccessful experience for its users. 

The   provision   and   structuring   of   Web   information   is   relatively   new   in 
organizations   (Morville   &   Rosenfeld,   2006,   p.   8)   and   the   unstructured 
information of the Web lives close to the surface of an organization’s entire 
repository of information. Many individuals within an organization contribute 
to  its  creation  and  ongoing   existence   (Morrogh,  2002,  p.  99).  Whilst  other 

JOURNALOFIA.ORG | ISSN 1903-7260

19

